Question 1
 What is the effect of giving a class member private access?
Response: When a member of a class is declared private it can be used in only one place in a program.
Correct answer: When a member of a class is declared private it can be used only in methods that are members of that class.
Question 2
 Methods of a class that are used by "outsiders" to access private (and other) data of the class are called...
Response: Private methods.
Correct answer: Access methods.
Question 3
 The set identifier returns the current value of a property and the get identifier sets a new value of a property.
Response: False
Correct answer: False
Question 4
 When a property or method is declared as public it becomes accessible only to the elements of the same class.
Response: False
Correct answer: False
Question 5
 Any private properties of the class that need to be accessed outside of the class can be made available through the use of getters and setters.
Response: False
Correct answer: True
Question 6
What term is used for hiding the details of an object from the other parts of a program?
Response: Encapsulation.
Correct answer: Encapsulation.

Question 7
Here is the general syntax for method definition:
accessModifier returnType methodName( parameterList ) {
  Java statements
  return returnValue;
}
What is true for the accessModifier?
Response: The access modifier must agree with the type of the return value.
Correct answer: It can be omitted, but if not omitted there are several choices, including private and public.
Question 8
 The class and constructor declarations must also be declared as private so that your project can create an instance of the class.
Response: True
Correct answer: False
Question 9
 Class properties and methods are declared as public so that code outside the classes can see the properties and methods inside the class.
Response: True
Correct answer: True
Question 10
 Encapsulation allows you to hide class properties and methods from other parts of your project but still allows you to manipulate them in a controlled manner.
Response: True
Correct answer: True



